# ChTY001
Since its initial release in 2001, the human reference genome has been continuously improved in both continuity and accuracy, and the recently-released telomere-to-telomere version—T2T-CHM13—reaches its top quality after 20 years of effort. However, T2T-CHM13 does not represent an authentic diploid human genome, but rather one derived from a simplified, nearly homozygous genome of a hydatidiform mole cell line. To address this limitation and provide an alternative pertinent to the Chinese population, the largest ethnic group in the world, we have assembled a complete diploid human genome, T2T-YAO, for a male Han Chinese individual. The genome includes telomere-to-telomere assemblies for all the 22+X+M and 22+Y chromosomes in his two haploids inherited separately from his parents and contain no artificial sequences or model nucleotides. The quality of T2T-YAO is much better than all diploid assemblies of human genome currently available, and by merging the diploid genome into a haploid reference through selecting the better assembly for each chromosome, we have generated T2T-YAO-hp, which reaches the quality of fewer than one error per ~22.3 Mb, almost equal to that of T2T-CHM13. Derived from the individual who lives in the aboriginal region of Han Chinese, T2T-YAO shows clear ancestry and potential genetic continuity from the ancient ancestors of the Han population. Each haplotype of T2T-YAO possesses ~330 Mb exclusive sequences and ~3100 unique genes as compared to CHM13, and their genome sequences show greater genetic distance to CHM13 than to each other in terms of nucleotide polymorphism and structural variations. The construction of T2T-YAO, a truly accurate and authentic representative of the Chinese population, would enable precise delineation of genomic variations and advance our understandings in human evolution, hereditability of diseases and phenotypes, especially within the context of the unique variations of the Chinese population. 
